   Chapter 6

Relativity

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

In this chapter you will learn how to:

     understand the meaning and use of the terms reference frame and inertial reference frame

     explore Galilean relativity and its transformation equations for position, time and velocity

     understand Einstein’s two postulates of special relativity

     see how the postulates of special relativity lead to the Lorentz transformation equations for

     the same event from the point of view of two reference frames

     use the Lorentz transformation for relativistic velocity addition

     understand that the spacetime interval between two events is an invariant quantity

     use the terms proper time interval and proper length

     solve problems involving time dilation and length contraction

     explore relativistic simultaneity

     use spacetime diagrams (sometimes called Minkowski diagrams)

     understand how muon decay experiments provide evidence for time dilation and length contraction
GUIDING QUESTIONS

What are the consequences of the constancy of the speed of light on our understanding of space and
time?
Introduction
This chapter deals with the kinematic parts of the theory of special relativity introduced by Einstein in 1905. As
we will see, the theory has revolutionised our traditional concepts of space and time; it leads to unexpected
phenomena such as length contraction and time dilation, and it introduces the speed of light as the ultimate
limiting speed for all material objects.

We will discuss the two main effects of the theory of relativity—time dilation and length contraction – and will
see how muon decay experiments provided the early experimental support for the theory.

We also introduce a pictorial representation of relativistic phenomena that makes the concepts of time
dilation, length contraction and simultaneity particularly transparent.
6.1 Reference frames and Lorentz transformations
In physics experiments, we (the observers) record the time and position at which events take place. To do that,
we use a reference frame. A reference frame is a set of co-ordinate axes and a set of clocks at every point in
space. If this set is not accelerating, the frame is called an inertial reference frame (see Figure 6.1).




Figure 6.1: A two-dimensional reference frame. There are clocks at every point in space (only a few are shown
here). All clocks are synchronised to show the same time.


  CHECK YOURSELF 1

  Which reference frames in this list are inertial frames?
  a   A sky diver falling freely

  b   A sky diver falling at terminal velocity

  c   A train moving with constant speed on a straight line

  d   A plane taking off

  e   The earth as it rotates around the sun

If the event is a strike of a lightning, an observer will look at the reading of the clock at the point where
lightning struck and record that reading as the time of the event. The co-ordinates of the strike point give the
position of the event in space. In Figure 6.2, lightning strikes at time t = 3 s at position x = 60 m and y = 0. (We
are ignoring the z co-ordinate.)




Figure 6.2: In this frame of reference the observer measures that lightning struck at time t = 3 s at position x
= 60 m.
The same event can also be viewed by another observer in a different reference frame. So, consider a situation
involving one observer on the ground and another who is a passenger on a train travelling at a velocity of v =
15 m s−1 relative to the ground observer, as shown in Figure 6.3.




Figure 6.3: The origins of the two frames of reference coincide when clocks in both frames show zero. The
origins then separate.

We can see things more clearly if we concentrate on the rulers (in metres) used by the ground and train
observers. In Figure 6.4 we see the two rulers on top of each other. This happens at time zero.




Figure 6.4: The situation at time zero.

The train moves and its ruler moves along with it. Lightning strikes at the point shown (Figure 6.5). The ground
and train observers assign different co-ordinates to this event.




Figure 6.5: The situation at time 3 s. Clearly, vt + x′ = x so that x′ = x − vt.

The ground observer uses the symbol x to denote the position of an event. The observer on the train uses the
symbol x′. As shown in Figures 6.3 and 6.5, these are related by:

x' = x − vt



since in the time of t seconds the train moves forward a distance vt. The equation expresses the relationship
between the space co-ordinates of the same event as viewed by two observers who are in relative motion. In
pre-relativity physics, time was absolute; that is, all observers make the same measurements for time, so t′ = t.

  KEY POINTS

  The equations x′ = x − vt and t′ = t are two of the Galilean transformation equations

Thus, to the event of Figures 6.3 and 6.5 (‘lightning strikes’) the ground observer assigns the co-ordinates x =
60 m and t = 3 s. The observer in the train assigns to this same event the co-ordinates t′ = 3 s and x′ = 60 − 15
× 3 = 15 m.
We are assuming here what we know from everyday experience (a guide that, as we will see, may not always
be reliable):

Two observers always agree on what the time co-ordinates are; in other words, time is common to both
observers.

Figure 6.6 shows Galileo Galilei in an oil painting by Justus Sustermans that can be seen in the Uffizi Gallery in
Florence.




Figure 6.6: Galileo Galilei (1564–1642).

Galilean relativity has an immediate consequence for the law of addition of velocities: consider a ball that rolls
on the train floor. The train moves at 20 m s−1. At time zero the ball is at the origin of the train frame, as shown
in Figure 6.7.




Figure 6.7: At time zero the ball is at the origin of the train frame. Its position is given by x = x′ = 0.

Two seconds later, the train has moved forward a distance of 40 m. During this time the ball has rolled on the
train floor a distance of 20 m, as shown in Figure 6.8. So the velocity of the ball for the train observer is
20
     = 10 m s    .
                −1

 2




Figure 6.8: Two seconds later the ball has moved a distance of 20 m along the train floor. The train moved
forward a distance of 40 m according to the ground.
The ground observer measures that the ball moved a distance of 60 m in 2 s, and for the ground observer the
ball’s velocity is:
60
                 −1
      = 30 m s
 2



Notice that 30 m s−1 = 20 m s−1 + 10 m s−1.

In general, if the train observer measures a velocity u′ for the ball, the ground observer will measure a velocity
u = u′ + v, where v is the velocity of the train.

The equation u = u′ + v or u′ = u − v is the final Galilean transformation equation.

  CHECK YOURSELF 2

  A bird flies due south at 4 m s−1. A glider flies due north at 5 m s−1.

  What is the velocity of the bird relative to the glider?


  WORKED EXAMPLE 6.1

  A ball rolls on the floor of a train at 2 m s−1 towards the right (with respect to the floor). The train moves
  with respect to the ground:

  a     to the right at 12 m s−1

  b     to the left at 12 m s−1.

  What is the velocity of the ball relative to the ground?

  Answer

  a     u = u
                ′
                    + v = 2 + 12 = 14 m s
                                            −1
                                                 .

  b     u = u
                ′
                    + v = 2 − 12 = −10 m s
                                             −1
                                                     .


The (apparently correct) argument in the answer to worked example 6.1 presents problems if we replace the
rolling ball in the train by a beam of light moving with velocity c = 3 × 108 m s−1 as measured by the train
observer (see Figure 6.9).

Using the Galilean velocity addition formula implies that light would be travelling at a higher speed relative to
the ground observer. At the end of the nineteenth century, considerable efforts were made to detect
variations in the speed of light depending on the state of motion of the source of light. The experimental
result was that no such variations were detected.
Figure 6.9: An observer in the train measures the speed of light to be c. An observer on the ground would
then measure a higher speed, c + v.

Einstein had solid theoretical reasons (based on Maxwell’s theory of electromagnetism) to believe that the
speed of light should be the same for all inertial observers. It should not depend on the speed of its source.
So, either Galileo’s velocity formula was wrong or Maxwell was wrong. Einstein trusted Maxwell. Doing so
meant that the equations of Galilean relativity had to be revised.

The postulates of special relativity
Einstein (Figure 6.10) based his theory of relativity on two postulates. The first was the old postulate of Galileo
which Einstein extended to all laws of physics, not just mechanics:

  KEY POINTS

  All the laws of physics are the same in all inertial frames.


The second was new:

  KEY POINTS

  The speed of light in vacuum is the same for all inertial observers.




Figure 6.10: Albert Einstein (1879–1955).


  THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE

  Einstein was so convinced of the constancy of the speed of light that he elevated it to one of the principles
  of relativity. But it was not until 1964 that conclusive experimental verification of this took place. In this
  experiment, at CERN, neutral pions moving at 0.99975c decayed into a pair of photons moving in different
  directions. The speed of the photons in both directions was measured to be c with extraordinary accuracy.
  The speed of light does not depend on the speed of its source. The theory of relativity has modified our
  fundamental ideas about space and time, ideas that went unchallenged for over two thousand years.
  Accepting the new ideas was not easy; the beauty of the theory of relativity lies in the amazingly simple
  postulates upon which it is based. It is interesting that at the time of the formulation of the theory little
  experimental evidence for the postulates was available. Yet, despite the simplicity of the postulates, their
  consequences are far reaching and have revolutionised physics.

These two postulates of relativity have far-reaching consequences. Einstein showed, in 1905, that, following
from his two postulates, the correct equations relating measurements in the two frames are:

 Galileo                    Einstein

 x′ = x − vt                x′ = γ(x − vt)                                      x = γ(x′ + vt′)

 t′ = t                         ′
                                               v
                                                                                           ′
                                                                                                   v
                                                                                                            ′
                            t       = γ (t −           x)                       t = γ (t       +           x )
                                                   2                                                   2
                                               c                                                   c



where the factor γ is called the gamma factor and equals γ =          1
                                                                                .
                                                                           v2
                                                                    √ 1−
                                                                           c2




The first column under Einstein gives x′ and t′ in terms of x and t, and the second gives x and t in terms of x′
and t′.

In 1890 the Dutch physicist H. Lorentz also derived these equations by demanding that the laws of
electromagnetism should be the same in all inertial frames, and so these are known as Lorentz transformations.
Einstein re-derived them from more general principles 15 years later. Notice right away that if v is very small
                                                 v
compared to the speed of light, then γ ≈ 1 and      is negligibly small, and so the Lorentz equations reduce to
                                                                2
                                                            c

the Galilean equations! In other words the effects of relativity become important only at speeds close to that
of light. Notice also that these equations become meaningless for speeds equal to or greater than that of
light. This is a sign that no material body can reach or exceed the speed of light.

These equations may be used to relate the co-ordinates of a single event in one inertial frame with those in
another. We will denote with S some inertial frame. A frame that moves with speed v to the right relative to S
will be called frame S′. These equations assume that when clocks in both frames show zero (i.e. t = t′ = 0) the
origins of the two frames coincide, i.e. x = x′ = 0.

Note that γ > 1. A graph of the gamma factor against speed is shown in Figure 6.11. We see that the gamma
factor is approximately 1 for velocities up to about half the speed of light but approaches infinity as the speed
approaches the speed of light.




Figure 6.11: The gamma factor as a function of velocity. The value of γ stays essentially close to 1 for values of
the velocity up to about half the speed of light but approaches infinity as the velocity approaches the speed of
light.


  CHECK YOURSELF 3
You are on an island watching the mainland some 20 km away. The instant you see light from the
headlights of a car on the mainland the clock strikes midnight. Is the time co-ordinate of the event ‘light is
emitted from the headlights’ 12 o’clock midnight?


WORKED EXAMPLE 6.2

Note: Unless stated otherwise, when clocks in both frames show zero, the origins of the two frames
coincide.

Lightning strikes a point on the ground (frame S) at position x = 3500 m and time t = 5.0 s. Determine
where and when the lightning struck according to a rocket that flies past the ground at speed 0.80 c to
the right.

Answer
This is a straightforward application of the Lorentz formulas (the gamma factor is
                     1                   5
γ =
              − −−− −−−
                                     =       ):
             √ 1 − 0.802                 3


        ′
x           = γ(x − vt)

                5
                                                  8
            =       (3500 − 0.80 × 3 × 10             × 5.0)
                3
                                 9
            = −2.0 × 10              m



and
                         vx
    ′
t           = γ (t −             )
                             2
                         c


                                                  8
                5⎛      0.80 × 3 × 10 × 3500 ⎞
            =     5.0 −
                3⎝                     2
                                     8       ⎠
                              (3 × 10 )

            = 8.3 s


The observers disagree on the co-ordinates of the event ‘lightning strikes’, but both are correct.

However, notice that in S the quantity c2 t2 − x2 is equal to (3 × 108 × 5.0)2 − 35002 = 2.25 × 1018 m2. In
the rocket frame c2 t′ 2 − x′2 is equal to (3 × 108 × 8.3)2 − (−2.0 × 109)2 = 2.25 × 1018 m2 which is the
same value as that in S. So both observers agree that this combination of time and space co-ordinates is
the same in both frames. We will understand this in the next section.


WORKED EXAMPLE 6.3

A rocket is moving at 0.80c past a space station (Figure 6.12).
a            Where is the rocket according to the space station when the rocket clock shows 0.60 µs?

b            What does the space station clock read at this position?




             Figure 6.12: For worked example 6.3.

Answer
  a        We examine the event E = rocket clock shows 0.60 µs. For this event x′ = 0 and t′ = 0.60 µs in the
           rocket frame.
           Hence, from the Lorentz formula:
                                  ′               ′
            x   = γ (x                + vt )

                         5
                                                                 8                         −6
                =            (0 + 0.80 × 3 × 10                      × 0.60 × 10                )
                         3

                = 240 m


  b         t   = γ (t
                              ′
                                      +
                                          vx
                                                      )
                                              2
                                          c

                     5
                                                      6
                =        (0.60 × 10                       + 0)
                     3

                = 1.0 μs



  (The quantity c2 t2 − x2 in S is equal to (3 × 108 × 1.0 × 10−6)2 − 2402 = 32 400 m2. In the rocket frame c2
  t′2 − x′2 is equal to (3 × 108 × 0.60 × 10−6)2 − 02 = 32 400 m2.)


  EXAM TIP

  It is important that you can use the Lorentz equations to go from frame S to frame S′ as well as from S′ to
  S.

Sometimes we will be interested in the difference in co-ordinates of a pair of events. So for events 1 and 2 we
define Δx = x − x and Δt = t − t in S′ and Δx = x − x and Δt = t − t in S.
                 ′            ′
                              2
                                              ′
                                              1
                                                             ′       ′
                                                                     2
                                                                                 ′
                                                                                 1                  2   1   2   1




These differences are related by

                                                                             v
      ′                                               ′
Δx        = γ(Δx − vΔt); Δt                               = γ (Δt −                  Δx)
                                                                             2
                                                                         c


or, in reverse,
                                                                                 v
                     ′                    ′                          ′                 ′
Δx = γ (Δx               + vΔt ) ; Δt = γ (Δt                            +           Δx )
                                                                                 2
                                                                             c




  WORKED EXAMPLE 6.4

  Consider a rocket that moves relative to a laboratory with speed v = 0.80 c to the right, as shown in
  Figure 6.13. We call the inertial frame of the lab S and that of the rocket S′. The length of the rocket as
  measured by the rocket observers is 630 m. A photon is emitted from the back of the rocket towards
  the front. Calculate the time taken for the photon to reach the front end of the rocket according to
  observers in the rocket and in the laboratory.




  Figure 6.13: For worked example 6.4.
  Answer
  Event 1 is the emission of the photon. Event 2 is the arrival of the photon at the front of the rocket:

  Δx′ = x′arrival − x′emission = 630 m

  This distance is covered at the speed of light, and so the time between emission and arrival (in S′) is
                     630
         ′
  Δt         =               = 2.1 μs
                         c


  In frame S we use
                     5
                                                                       −6
  Δx =                   (630 + 0.80c × 2.1 × 10                               ) = 1890 m
                     3


                     5                            0.80c × 630
                                     −6
  Δt =                   (2.1 × 10        +                                    ) = 6.3 μs
                     3                                         2
                                                           c




The spacetime interval
We have seen that observers in different inertial frames assign different space and time co-ordinates to the
same events. For example, frame S assigns (Δx, Δt) for the difference in co-ordinates of two events and S′
assigns (Δx′, Δt′). These are related by Lorentz transformations. Interestingly, however, there is a quantity that
both observers will agree on as we have already indicated. This is called the spacetime interval. It is given by
(Δs)2 = (cΔt)2 − (Δx)2 in S. In S′ the spacetime interval is (Δs′)2 = (cΔt′)2 − (Δx′)2 and it has the same value as in S
(this is left as an exercise in algebra for you). In other words

(cΔt)
             2
                 − (Δx)
                             2
                                  = (cΔt )
                                              ′   2
                                                      − (Δx )
                                                                   ′   2
                                                                           .

In practice this means that if we know three of the quantities Δt, Δx, Δt′, Δx′ we can find the fourth from the
spacetime interval. Consider an observer X at the origin of a frame S′ that moves past a frame S with speed of
0.80c. An observer in S measures that X turns on a light at t = 0 and turns it off at t = 4.0 s. For how long was
the light on according to S′?

We know that Δt = 4.0 s, Δx = 0.80c × 4.0 = 9.6 × 108 m, Δx′ = 0. Hence
             2               2                ′   2                ′   2
(cΔt)            − (Δx)           = (cΔt )            − (Δx )


                              2                            2                        2
                 8                                     8                        ′             2
(3 × 10              × 4.0)       − (9.6 × 10 )                = (cΔt )                 − 0



Hence Δt′ = 2.4 s.

Of course we could get the answer with a Lorentz transformation as well:

                 5                   0.80c
Δt
     ′
         =           × (4.0 −                         × 0.80c × 4.0) = 2.4 s                      .
                 3                        2
                                      c




  CHECK YOURSELF 4

  A photon travels from A to B on a straight line. What is the spacetime interval for these points?


  THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE

  Note that there is no question as to which observer is right and which is wrong when it comes to
  measuring time intervals. Both are right. Two inertial observers moving relative to each other at constant
  velocity both reach valid conclusions according to the principle of relativity.


  TEST YOUR UNDERSTANDING
1   Give two reasons why the ground on which you stand is not an inertial reference frame. Under what
    approximation is it an inertial frame?

2   Imagine that you are travelling in a train at constant speed in a straight line and that you cannot look
    at or communicate with the outside. Think of the first experiment that comes to your mind that you
    could do to try to find out that you are indeed moving. Then analyse it carefully to see why it will not
    work.

3   Outline an experiment you might perform in a train that is accelerating along a straight line that
    would convince you that it is accelerating. Discuss if you could also determine the direction of the
    acceleration.

4   An inertial frame of reference S′ moves past another inertial frame S moving to the right with speed
    15 m s–1. At time zero the origins of the two frames coincide.
    a    A phone rings at location x = 20 m and t = 5.0 s. Determine using Galilean transformation
         equations the location of this event in the S′ frame.

    b    A ball is measured to have velocity 5.0 m s–1 in frame S′. Calculate the velocity of the ball in frame
         S.

5   An inertial frame of reference S′ moves past another inertial frame S moving to the left with speed 25
    m s–1. At time zero the origins of the two frames coincide.
    a    A phone rings at location x′ = 24 m and t = 5.0 s. Determine using Galilean transformation
         equations the location of this event in the S frame.

    b    A ball is measured to have velocity –15 m s–1 in frame S. Calculate the velocity of the ball in frame
         S′.

6   A rocket moving at speed 0.80c relative to the ground emits a light signal in the direction of the
    velocity. What is the speed of the light signal relative to the ground according to Galileo?
    In the following questions the frames S and S′ have their usual meaning, i.e. S′ moves past S with
    velocity v, and when the origins coincide clocks are set to zero. You are expected to use relativistic
    equations for these questions.

7   a    Calculate the gamma factor for a speed of 0.850c and a velocity of –0.850c.
    b    Calculate the speed that gives a gamma factor of 4.00.

    c    Is there a speed that gives a gamma factor of 0.50?

8   In frame S an event E has co-ordinates (x = 600 m, t = 2.0 μs). Frame S′ is moving at speed 0.75c in the
    positive direction. Determine the co-ordinates of E in S′.

9   An event E has co-ordinates (x′ = 520 m, t′ = 4.0 μs) in a frame S′ that moves with velocity 0.60c
    relative to frame S. Determine the co-ordinates of E in S.

10 Frame S′ moves with velocity 0.98c relative to S. An explosion occurs at the origin of frame S′ when the
   clocks in S′read 6.0 μs. Calculate where and when the explosion takes place according to frame S.

11 Frame S′ moves with velocity 0.60c relative to S. Calculate the reading of the clocks in frame S′ as the
   origin of S′ passes point x = 120 m.

12 Two events in frame S are such that Δx = x2 − x1 = 1200 m and Δt = t2 − t1 = 6.00 μs.

    a    Frame S′moves with velocity 0.600c relative to S. Calculate Δx′ = x′2 − x′1 and Δt′ = t′2 − t′1.

    b    Determine if there is another frame S″ such that in this frame Δt″ = 0. Comment on your answer.

13 A rocket moving at 0.80c leaves earth towards a planet that is a distance of 24 ly from earth as
   measured in the earth’s frame. By considering the events E1 = rocket leaves earth and E2 = rocket
    arrives at the planet, calculate the time it takes to get to the planet according to the rocket. (ly stands
    for ‘light year’; it is the distance travelled by light in one year. 1 ly = c × year.)

14 A rocket travelling at 0.60c with respect to earth leaves earth towards a planet. After 4.0 years (as
   measured by the rocket clocks) a radio message is sent to earth. Calculate when it will arrive on earth
   as measured by:
    a    observers on earth

    b    observers on the rocket.

15 In frame S event E(arly) occurs before event L(ate). The events are separated by a time interval Δt = tL
    – tE and a space interval Δx = xL – xE.

                                                                        Δx
    a    If E is the event that causes event L to happen, explain why        ≤ c   .
                                                                        Δt


    b    Is there a frame in which L occurs before E?
6.2 Effects of relativity

Time dilation
Suppose that an observer in a frame S′ that moves relative to a frame S measures the time in between
successive ticks of a clock. The clock is at rest in S′ and so the measurement of the ticks occurs at the same
place, Δx′ = 0. The result of the measurement is Δt′. The observer in S will measure a time interval equal to
                                          ′
                                 vΔx
                     ′
Δt   = γ (Δt             +                    )
                                      2
                                  c
                 ′
     = γ (Δt         + 0)

             ′
Δt   = γΔt



This shows that the interval between the ticks of a clock that moves relative to the observer in S is greater than
the interval measured in S′where the clock is at rest. This is known as time dilation. In this case, the time
measured by S′ is special because it represents a time interval between two events that happened at the same
point in space. The clock is at rest in S′ so its ticks happen at the same point in S′. Such a time interval is called
proper time interval. (This is just a name; it is not implied that this is a more ‘correct’ measurement of time).

  KEY POINTS

  A proper time interval is the time between two events that take place at the same point in space.

The time dilation formula is best remembered as

time interval                = γ × proper time interval

                                              1
                             =                                 × proper time interval
                                          −−−−−−
                                                       2
                                                   v
                                 √1 −
                                                       2
                                                   c




  WORKED EXAMPLE 6.5

  The time interval between the ticks of a clock carried on a fast rocket is half of what observers on Earth
  record. Calculate the speed of the rocket relative to earth.

  Answer
  The rocket observers measure the proper time interval since the events ‘first tick’ and ‘second tick’ occur
  at the same place in the rocket frame. From the time dilation formula it follows that
                                               −−−−−−
                                                                   2
             1                                                 v           1
  2 =                            ⇒ √1 −                                =
         −−−−−−                                                    2
                             2                                 c           2
                         v
        √1 −
                             2
                         c

                                                           2
                                                   v                   1
                                 ⇒ 1 −                         =
                                                       2
                                                   c                   4

                                               2
                                           v                   3
                                 ⇒                 =
                                               2
                                           c                   4

                                 ⇒ v = 0.866c




  WORKED EXAMPLE 6.6

  A rocket moves past an observer in a laboratory with speed v = 0.85c. The observer in the laboratory
  measures that a radioactive isotope (which is at rest in the laboratory) has a half-life of 2.0 min.
  Calculate the half-life measured by the rocket observers.

  Answer
  We have two events here. The first is that the laboratory observer sees a container with a given mass of
  the radioactive isotope. The second event is that the laboratory observer sees a container with half the
  mass of the radioactive isotope. These events are separated by 2.0 min as far as the laboratory observer
  is concerned. These two events take place at the same point in space as far as the laboratory observer is
  concerned, and so the laboratory observer has measured the proper time interval between these two
  events. Hence the rocket observers will measure a longer half-life of time interval = γ × proper time
  interval
               1
  =                     × 2.0 min
        − −−− −−−
       √ 1 − 0.852

  = 3.80 min



  The point of this example is that you must not make the mistake of thinking that proper time intervals
  are measured by ‘the moving’ observer. There is no such thing as ‘the moving’ observer: the rocket
  observer is free to consider themself at rest and the laboratory observer moving with velocity v =
  −0.85c.


  SCIENCE IN CONTEXT

  The Global Positioning System (GPS) depends on precisely measuring signals from satellites which move at
  speeds of about 4 km s−1. This is a small speed compared to the speed of light. The gamma factor for this
  speed is greater than 1 by approximately 9 × 10−11. In one day there are 86 400 s, so if relativity is not
  taken into account we would have an error of about 9 × 10−11 × 86 400 ≈ 8 μs in clocks after one day. For
  signals travelling at the speed of light this would imply an uncertainty in position of about 8 × 10−6 × 3 ×
  108 = 2400 m. This would make the GPS worthless. (GPS also uses corrections from general relativity.)


Length contraction
Now consider a rod that is at rest in frame S′. An observer in S′ measures the position of the ends of the rod,
subtracts and finds a length Δx′ = L0. (Notice that since the rod is at rest, the measurement of the position of
the ends can be done at different times—the rod is not going anywhere. But for the observer in S the rod is
moving. So to measure its length the observer must record the position of the ends of the rod at the same
time, i.e. with Δt = 0. Since Δx′ = γ(Δx − vΔt) where Δx = L is the length in S, we obtain that

  EXAM TIP

  Note that it is only lengths in the direction of motion that are contracted.

L0    = γ(L − 0)

          L0
 L    =
          γ


This shows that the rod, which moves relative to the observer in S, has a shorter length in S than the length
measured S′where the rod is at rest. This is known as length contraction. A reference frame in which an
object is at rest is called that object’s rest frame.

  KEY POINTS

  The length Δx′ = L0 is special because it is measured in a frame of reference where the rod is a rest. Such a
  length is called a proper length.

The length of an object measured by an inertial observer with respect to whom the object is at rest is called
proper length. Observers with respect to whom the rod moves at speed v measure a shorter length:
               proper length
length =
                    γ
 WORKED EXAMPLE 6.7

 An unmanned spacecraft leaves earth with speed 0.80c towards a planet that is 40 ly away as measured
 by earth observers. How long will the trip take according to:
 a      earth clocks

 b      spacecraft clocks?

 Answer

 a      According to earth the time is simply
           40 ly                  c × year
                          = 50               = 50 yr   .
           0.80c                     c


 b      Leaving earth and arriving at the planet occurs at the same point according to the spacecraft so the
                                                                                            50       50
        spacecraft measures a proper time interval for the trip. Hence it takes a time of        =        = 30 yr   .
                                                                                            γ         5

                                                                                                      3




 Equivalently we can argue that the spacecraft is at rest and the planet is coming towards the spacecraft
                                                                                            40       40
 at speed 0.80c. The distance between earth and planet is then length contracted to              =        = 24 ly
                                                                                            γ        5

                                                                                                     3
                                                                      24 ly
 and so ‘the planet will come to the spacecraft’ in a time of                       .
                                                                              = 30 yr
                                                                      0.80c




 THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE

 The time dilation effect described is a ‘real’ effect. In the Hafele–Keating experiment, accurate atomic
 clocks taken for a ride aboard planes moving at ordinary speeds and then compared with similar clocks
 left behind show readings that are smaller by amounts consistent with the formulae of relativity. Time
 dilation is also a daily effect in the operation of particle accelerators. In such machines, particles are
 accelerated to speeds that are very close to the speed of light, and thus relativistic effects must be taken
 into account when designing these machines. The time dilation formula has also been verified in muon
 decay experiments.


Addition of velocities
Consider a frame S′ that moves at constant speed v in a straight line relative to another frame S. Observers in
both frames measure the velocity of an object. Observers in S′ measure the velocity to be u′. Observers in S
measure the velocity of the same object to be u. How are u and u′related? We saw that the Galilean answer (u
= uʹ + v) cannot be correct. Einstein showed that the Lorentz equations lead to the following answer:
            ′
        u
                          or, solving for uʹ, u =
                + v                             ′
                                                           u − v
u =
                  ′
                u v                                           uv
       1 +                                             1 −
                                                                  2
                 c
                     2                                        c



Think of frame S as the ground and the frame S′ to be a rocket moving at velocity 0.80c relative to S. The
rocket launches a missile with speed 0.50c relative to the rocket. This means that v = 0.80c and u′ = 0.50c. The
speed of the missile relative to S is u and is given by
            ′
        u       + v
u =
                     ′
                 u v
       1 +
                      2
                 c

       0.50c + 0.80c
=
            0.50c × 0.80c
     1 +
                              2
                          c

     1.30c
=
      1.40

= 0.93c
In Galilean relativity then answer would be u = u′ + v = 1.30c and so impossible. It can be easily checked that,
irrespective of how close u′ or v are to the speed of light, u is always less than c.

 WORKED EXAMPLE 6.8

 A rocket moves with speed 0.90c relative to the ground. A beam of light is emitted from the rocket in
 the forward direction. The rocket measures a speed c for the light beam. Use the velocity addition
 formula to show that the ground observers also measure a speed c for the light beam.

 Answer
 Applying the formula with v = 0.90c and u′ = c we find
                    ′
                u       + v
  u       =
                          ′
                        u v
              1 +
                             2
                         c

                 c + 0.90c
          =
                        c × 0.90c
              1 +
                                     2
                                 c

              1.90c
          =
                1.90

          = c




 WORKED EXAMPLE 6.9

 Two rockets move away from each other with speeds of 0.80c and 0.90c with respect to the ground, as
 shown in Figure 6.14. What is the velocity of rocket B as measured by rocket A?




 Figure 6.14: For worked example 6.9.

 Answer
 Let us call the frame of the ground S and that of rocket A, S′. Then v = −0.80c. We want to find the
 velocity of rocket B relative to A, i.e. relative to S′, so we are looking for u′. The velocity of rocket B
 relative to the ground (S) is u = +0.90c and so
                 u − v
      ′
  u       =
                         uv
                1 −
                             2
                         c

                 +0.90c − (−0.80c)
          =
                         (0.90c)(−0.80c)
                1 −
                                             2
                                         c

                +1.70c
          =
                1 + 0.72

          = +0.988c ≈ +0.99c


 The velocity of rocket A relative to rocket B is expected to be –0.99c. We can calculate this explicitly as
 follows: again let S be the ground frame and S′ the frame of rocket B. Then v = +0.90c and u = −0.80c.
 We are again looking for u′ and
                    u − v
      ′
  u        =
                         uv
                1 −
                             2
                         c

                        −0.80c − 0.90c
           =
                         (−0.80c)(0.90c)
                1 −
                                             2
                                         c

           ≈ −0.99c


  as expected.


Simultaneity
Another great change introduced into physics as a result of relativity is in the concept of simultaneity.
Suppose that as usual we have frames S and S′ with frame S′ moving to the right with speed v relative to S.
Suppose that two events take place at the same time in frame S′. The time interval between these two events is
thus zero, Δt′ = 0. What is the time interval between the same two events when measured in S? The Lorentz
equations give
                                 v
                         ′                       ′
Δt        = γ (Δt            +           Δx )
                                     2
                                 c
                v
                             ′
          = γ           Δx
                    2
                c


If Δx′ ≠ 0, then the events will not be simultaneous in other frames. On the other hand, if Δx′ = 0, i.e. if the
simultaneous events in S′ occur at the same point in space, then they are also simultaneous in all other frames.

  KEY POINT

  Events that are simultaneous for one observer and which take place at different points in space, are not
  simultaneous for another observer in motion relative to the first.

  On the other hand, if two events are simultaneous for one observer and take place at the same point in
  space, they are simultaneous for all other observers as well.


Imagine an observer T is in the middle of a train carriage that is moving with constant speed to the right with
respect to the train station. We are told that two light signals are emitted from the ends of the carriage at the
same time as far as the observer T in the train is concerned, Figure 6.15. It is then clear that the two signals
arrive at T at the same time as far as T is concerned. What does an observer G at rest on the ground say about
this situation?




Figure 6.15: Light leaves A and B at the same time as far as T is concerned.

The emissions from A and B take place at different points in space and are simultaneous for observer T. So they
will not be simultaneous for observer G. On the other hand the arrival of the signals at T is simultaneous for T
and happen at the same point in space so they will also be simultaneous for G.
Which signal was emitted first according to G? From G’s point of view, T is moving away from the signal from
A. So the signal from A has a larger distance to cover to get to T. If the signals are received at the same time,
and moved at the same speed (c), it must be that the one from A was emitted before that from B.

  CHECK YOURSELF 5

  Two observers, N and M, are at rest on the ground. M is midway between two street lights (Figure 6.16). M
  measures that the streetlights turn on at the same time.




  Figure 6.16: For check yourself question 5.

  a    Does M receive light from the two lamps at the same time?

  b    Do the street lights turn on at the same time according to N?

  c    Does N receive light from the two lamps at the same time?


  WORKED EXAMPLE 6.10

  Let us re-work the situation of Figure 6.15 quantitatively. Take the proper length of the ‘train’ (frame S′)
  to be 300 m and let it move with speed 0.98c to the right. Determine, according to an observer on the
  ground (frame S), which light is emitted first and by how much.

  Answer
  We are told that Δt′ = 0 and Δx′ = x′B − x′A = 300 m. We want to find Δt, the time interval between the
                                                                                              1
  events representing the emission of light from A and B. The gamma factor is γ =        − −−− −−−
                                                                                                      = 5.0.
                                                                                        √ 1 − 0.982

  Then
  Δt   = tB − tA

                         v
                 ′                        ′
       = γ (Δt       +           Δx )
                             2
                         c

                                 0.98c
       = 5.0 × (0 +                           × 300)
                                      2
                                  c

       = +4.9 μs


  The positive sign indicates that tB > tA, i.e. the light from A was emitted 4.9 μs before the light from B.


Muon decay
Muons are particles with properties similar to those of the electron except that they are more massive, are
unstable and decay into electrons; they have an average lifetime of about 2.2 × 10−6 s. (The reaction is
         + v̄ + v .)
 −       −
μ  → e       e           μ




This is the lifetime measured when the muon is at rest—this is the proper time interval between the creation
of a muon and its subsequent decay.

From the point of view of an observer in the laboratory, however, the muons are moving at high speed; the
lifetime is longer because of time dilation. Consider a muon created by a source at the top of a mountain 3.0
km tall, Figure 6.17. The muon travels at 0.99c towards the surface of the earth.




Figure 6.17: a Muons created at the top of the mountain would not have enough time to reach the surface as
muons if relativity did not hold. b With relativity the muons last longer and make it to the surface before
decaying.

Without the relativistic time dilation effect, the muon would have travelled a distance of only
                8                −6
0.99 × 3 × 10       × 2.2 × 10        m = 0.653 km



before decaying into an electron. Thus a detector at the base of the mountain would record the arrival of
electrons, not muons. But experiments show the arrival of muons at the detector. This is because the lifetime
of the muon as measured by ground observers is
time interval       = γ × proper time

                                   −6
                        2.2 × 10           s
                    =
                         − −−− −−−
                        √ 1 − 0.992

                                      −5
                    = 1.56 × 10            s



In this time the muon travels a distance (as measured by the ground observers) of
                8                 −5
0.99 × 3 × 10       × 1.56 × 10         m = 4.63 km



This means that the muon reaches the surface of the earth before decaying.

The fact that muons do make it to the surface of the earth is evidence in support of the time dilation effect.

The muon exists as a muon for only 2.2 × 10−6 s in the muon’s rest frame. So how does an observer travelling
along with the muon explain the arrival of muons (and not electrons) at the surface of the earth, Figure 6.18?




Figure 6.18: From the point of view of an observer on the muon the mountain is much shorter.

The answer is that the distance of 3.0 km measured by the observers on earth is a proper length for them but
not for the observer at rest with respect to the muon. This observer claims that it is the earth that is moving
upward and so measures a length-contracted distance of
       − −−− −−−
                2
3.0 × √ 1 − 0.99 km = 0.42 km
to the surface of the earth. The earth’s surface is coming up to this observer with a speed of 0.99c and so the
time when they will meet is
              3
  0.42 × 10
                                        −6
                      s = 1.4 × 10           s
                  8
0.99 × 3 × 10


that is, before the muon decays!

In this sense, muon decay experiments are direct confirmations of time dilation and indirect confirmations of
length contraction.

 WORKED EXAMPLE 6.11

 At the Stanford Linear Accelerator (SLAC), electrons of speed v = 0.960c move a distance of 3.00 km.
 a    Calculate how long this takes according to observers in the laboratory.

 b    Calculate how long this takes according to an observer travelling along with the electrons.

 c    Find the speed of the linear accelerator in the rest frame of the electrons.

 Answer
                                                                                          3
                                                                              3.00 × 10
 a    In the laboratory the electrons take a time of                                                  s = 1.04 × 10
                                                                                                                      −5
                                                                                                                           s
                                                                                                  8
                                                                           0.960 × 3.00 × 10


 b    The arrival of the electrons at the beginning and the end of the accelerator track happens at the
      same point in space as far as the observer travelling along with the electrons is concerned, and so
                                                                                              1
      that is a proper time interval. The gamma factor is γ =                        − −−−− −−−
                                                                                                         = 3.571 . Thus
                                                                                    √ 1 − 0.9602


      time interval          = γ × proper time interval


                                                              −5
                                             1.04 × 10
       proper time interval             =                              s
                                                      3.571
                                                              −6
                                        = 2.91 × 10                s


 c    The speed of the accelerator is obviously v = 0.960c in the opposite direction. But this can be
      checked as follows. As far as the electron is concerned, the length of the accelerator track is moving
      past it and so is length-contracted according to
                          proper length
      length      =
                                γ

                          3.00 km
                  =
                           3.571

                  = 0.840 km


      and so has a speed of
                                        3
                          0.840 × 10
                                                      −1
       speed          =                      m s
                                      −6
                          2.91 × 10
                                    8            −1
                      = 2.89 × 10       m s

                      ≈ 0.96c




 SCIENCE IN CONTEXT

 General arguments apply to special cases but not the other way around.
 Years before relativity was introduced by Einstein an experiment performed by Michelson and Morley gave
 a very puzzling result concerning the speed of light. There were frantic attempts to resolve the difficulties
 posed by this experiment. One attempt was to assume that moving lengths appear shorter. Similarly,
 Lorentz showed that if one used his Lorentz transformations equations certain difficulties with
 electromagnetism went away. But it was Einstein who re-derived these transformations equations from far
more general principles, the postulates of relativity. By demanding that all inertial observers experience the
same laws of physics and measuring the same velocity of light in vacuum the Lorentz equations emerged
as the simplest linear equations that could achieve this.


TEST YOUR UNDERSTANDING

16 An earthling sits on a bench in a park eating a sandwich. It takes him 5 min to finish it according to his
   watch. He is being monitored by planet Zenga invaders who are passing earth at a speed of 0.90c.
    a    Calculate how long the aliens reckon it takes an earthling to eat a sandwich.

    b    The aliens in the spacecraft get hungry and start eating their sandwiches. It takes a Zengan 5 min
         to eat her sandwich according to Zengan clocks. They are actually being observed by earthlings
         as they fly over earth. Calculate how long it takes a Zengan to eat a sandwich according to earth
         clocks.

17 A cube has density ρ when the density is measured at rest. Suggest what happens to the density of
   the cube when it travels past you at a relativistic speed.

18 A pendulum in a fast train is found by observers on the train to have a period of 1.0 s. Calculate the
   period observers on a station platform would measure as the train moves past them at a speed of
   0.95c.

19 A spacecraft moves past you at a speed of 0.95c, and you measure its length to be 100 m. Calculate
   the length you would measure if it were at rest with respect to you.

20 Two identical fast trains move parallel to each other. An observer on train A tells an observer on train
   B that by her measurements (i.e. A’s) train A is 30 m long and train B is 28 m long.

    The observer on train B takes measurements. Calculate what he will find for:
    a    the speed of train A with respect to train B

    b    the length of train A

    c    the length of train B.

21 An unstable particle has a lifetime of 5.0 × 10−8 s as measured in its rest frame. The particle is moving
   in a laboratory with a speed of 0.95c with respect to the lab.
    a    Calculate the lifetime of the particle according to an observer at rest in the laboratory.

    b    Calculate the distance travelled by the particle before it decays, according to the observer in the
         laboratory.

22 The star Vega is about 50 ly away from earth. A spacecraft moving at 0.995c is heading towards Vega.
    a    Calculate how long it will take the spacecraft to get to Vega according to clocks on earth.

    b    The crew of the spacecraft consists of 18-year-old IB graduates. Calculate how old the graduates
         are (according to their clocks) when they arrive at Vega.

23 A rocket approaches a mirror on the ground at a speed of 0.90c as shown in Figure 6.19.

    The distance D between the front of the rocket and the mirror is 2.4 × 1012 m, as measured by the
    observers on the ground, when a light signal is sent towards the mirror from the front of the rocket.
    Figure 6.19: For question 23.

    Calculate when the reflected signal is received by the rocket as measured by:
    a    the observers on the ground

    b    the observers on the rocket.

24 Two objects move along the same straight line as shown in Figure 6.20. Their speeds are as measured
   by an observer on the ground.




    Figure 6.20: For question 24.

    Find:
    a    the velocity of B as measured by A;

    b    the velocity of A as measured by B.

25 Repeat question 24 for the arrangement in Figure 6.21.




    Figure 6.21: For question 25.

26 A particle A moves to the right with a speed of 0.60c relative to the ground. A second particle B
   moves to the right with a speed of 0.70c relative to A. Calculate the speed of B relative to the ground.

27 Particle A moves to the left with a speed of 0.60c relative to the ground. A second particle B moves to
   the right with a speed of 0.70c relative to A. Find the speed of B relative to the ground.

28 A muon travelling at 0.95c covers a distance of 2.00 km (as measured by an earthbound observer)
   before decaying.
    a    Calculate the muon’s lifetime as measured by the earthbound observer.

    b    Calculate the lifetime as measured by an observer travelling along with the muon.

29 The lifetime of the unstable pion particle is measured to be 2.6 × 10−8 s (when at rest). This particle
   travels a distance of 20 m in the laboratory just before decaying. Calculate its speed.

30 In frame S two light signals are emitted from the same point in space 2.0 µs apart. In frame S′ the time
   between the emissions is measured to be 8.0 µs.
    a    What is the speed of S′ relative to S?
    b    How far apart are the emission points according to S′?

31 A rocket approaches a space station. The rocket moves with velocity 0.80c relative to the space
   station. Two lights at the ends of the space station turn on at the same time according to space
   station observers. Which light turns on first according to rocket observers?

32 Two simultaneous events in frame S are separated by a distance Δx = x2 − x1 = 1200 m. Determine the
    time separating these two events in frame S′, stating which one occurs first. S′ moves past S with
    velocity 0.80c.

33 A spacecraft leaves earth moving away at speed 0.60c relative to earth. Mandy, an astronaut, has her
   birthday that day. In a year’s time (according to spacecraft clocks) she will have her birthday again.
   Her friends on earth want to celebrate by sending her a light signal. When, by earth clocks, should the
   light signal be sent so that it arrives at the spacecraft on Mandy’s birthday?
6.3 Spacetime diagrams
We now introduce a pictorial representation of relativistic phenomena, first introduced into physics by one of
Einstein’s friends, H. Minkowski.

Spacetime diagrams
In Chapter 1 we saw lots of motion graphs. In particular we saw graphs of position (vertical axis) versus time
(horizontal axis). In relativity it is customary to show these graphs with the axes reversed, i.e. time is plotted on
the vertical axis and position on the horizontal. These are called spacetime diagrams (sometimes called
Minkowski diagrams). For reasons we will see shortly, it is convenient to instead plot ct on the vertical axis
rather than time itself. The vertical axis then also has units of length. Since the speed of light is a constant
everyone agrees on, knowing the value of ct allows us to find the value of t.




Figure 6.22: a The space and time co-ordinates of an event: x = 5.0 m and ct = 6.0 m. b The worldline of a
particle at rest is the sequence of events showing the position of the particle at different times (blue line). A
particle moving to the right has a worldline shown by the red line.

Figure 6.22a shows a spacetime diagram and an event (marked by the dot). The space and time co-ordinates
of the event are read from the graph in the usual way: we draw lines through the dot parallel to the axes and
see where the lines intersect the axes. This event has x = 5.0 m and ct = 6.0 m giving
          6.0
t =                     = 2.0 × 10
                                     −8
                                          s   .
                    8
      3.0 × 10


Now consider a particle that is at rest at position x = a, Figure 6.22b. As time goes by we may think of a
sequence of events showing the position of the particle (which does not change) at different times. This
sequence of events traces the blue straight line on the spacetime diagram. This is called the worldline of the
particle. Another particle that starts from x = 0 at t = 0 and moves with constant positive velocity would have a
worldline as shown in red. From the diagram:
           x            y
tan θ =         =
           ct           c


The tangent of the angle between the worldline and the ct axis gives the speed divided by the speed of light.

This is why it is convenient to plot ct on the vertical axis: a photon moves at speed c, and so it makes an angle
               c
of θ = tan     −1
                  = 45° to both axes. Since nothing can exceed c, the worldline of any particle will always make
                    c

an angle less than 45° with the ct axis. In Figure 6.23a, the red worldline represents a particle moving to the
right. The green worldline belongs to a particle moving to the left. The blue worldline is impossible since it
involves a speed greater than c. Figure 6.23b shows an event E at x = 0 and ct = 0. The region coloured yellow
consists of all events that can be influenced by event E. For example, E could be an explosion. We see the glass
of a window shatter later on, event L. Could the event E be responsible for L? The answer is that it could if L is
in the yellow region but could not if L is outside this region. The fastest a signal can travel is at the speed of
light so any signal from E to L has to be within the yellow region. Similarly, events that could have influenced E
are within the region coloured blue.

  EXAM TIP

  An event E can be the cause of an event L if the time separating E and L is greater than or equal to the
  travel time of a photon from the position of E to that of L.




Figure 6.23: a Various worldlines. The one in blue is impossible because it corresponds to a particle moving
faster than light. b Future and past light-cones. Event E could be the cause of an event if the time separation is
greater or equal to the photon travel time. This means the events E could cause lie in the yellow region.

To proceed we need a small digression. In mathematics we are used to working with axes that are at right
angles to each other, Figure 6.24a. But they don’t have to be. The axes could be slanted, Figure 6.24b. To find
the co-ordinates of a point on a diagram with slanted axes we simply draw lines parallel to the axes and see
where they intersect the axes.
Figure 6.24: To find the co-ordinates of a point we draw lines from the point parallel to the axes and see
where these lines intersect the axes.

Convince yourself that the x co-ordinate of point P and the ct co-ordinate of point Q in Figure 6.24 are both
zero.

Now consider a second inertial reference frame that moves to the right with speed v. Let us assume that when
clocks in both frames show zero the origins of the frames coincide. The origin of frame S′ moves to the right
                                                                                      v
with speed v. Therefore, the worldline of the origin of S′will make an angle θ = tan    with the ct axis of S.
                                                                                                       −1

                                                                                                            c

But this worldline is just the collection of all events with x′ = 0 and so is the time axis of the frame S′. Where is
the space axis? It has to make the same angle θ with the x-axis, Figure 6.25. To see why, consider a photon
emitted at the origin (yellow worldline). In the frame S′ the distance travelled is L and the time taken is
                           L                                      L
ct
     ′
         = L ⇒ t
                   ′
                       =       . So the speed of light in S′ is       = c   which is precisely what we want: the speed of light
                           c                                      L

                                                                  τ

must be the same in all inertial frames. Hence the axes must be slanted as the red axes in Figure 6.25.
Figure 6.25: Two frames in relative velocity on the same spacetime diagram. The red axes represent a frame
moving to the right.


  WORKED EXAMPLE 6.12

  Use the spacetime diagram in Figure 6.26 to estimate the speed of frame S′ relative to frame S.




  Figure 6.26: For worked example 6.12.

  Answer
                                          3.0                     v
  The tangent of the angle θ is tan θ =         = 0.60   and so       = 0.60 ⇒ v = 0.60c   .
                                          5.0                     c




Finding the scale on the primed axes
The diagram in Figure 6.27 shows the axes of a frame S, and the red axes are the axes of a frame S′ that moves
with speed 0.60c relative to S. The important thing to notice about the red axes is that they have a different
scale than those of the black axes! In other words we cannot use our ruler to find out how long a unit is on the
x axis and then lay the ruler on the x′ axis in order to find a length of 1. So where is the 1 on the x′ axis and
where is the 1 on the ct′ axis?

On the x′ axis we have a point with co-ordinates x′ = 1 and ct′ = 0. In the S frame this point has a co-ordinate
that we can find using a Lorentz transformation (the gamma factor for a speed of 0.60c is 1.25):
              ′          ′
x    = γ (x       + vt )

     = γ(1 − 0)

     = 1.25


Similarly, to find the point with co-ordinates ct′ = 1 and x′ = 0 we use
                  ′          ′
ct   = γ (ct          + vcx )

     = γ(1 − 0)

     = 1.25




Figure 6.27

    WORKED EXAMPLE 6.13

    Find the scale on the red axes in Figure 6.28a.




    Figure 6.28a The scale on the primed axes is different from that on the unprimed axes.
  Answer
                                                                               1
  The speed of the red frame is about 0.75c. The gamma factor is then      − −−− −−−
                                                                                        ≈ 1.5   . Where the blue
                                                                                    2
                                                                          √ 1 − 0.75

  lines intersect the red axes is where the ‘1’ is.




  Figure 6.28b For worked example 6.13.




Length contraction and spacetime diagrams
Spacetime diagrams show length contraction in a very clear and direct way. Imagine a rod of proper length 1
m at rest in the S′ frame. This frame moves away from a frame S with some speed v. We expect that the
observers in S will measure a length for the rod that will be less than 1 m. The left end of the rod is at x′ = 0
and the other end is at x′ = 1 m. The worldlines of the ends of the rod are shown in Figure 6.29 (red line for
the left end, blue line for the right end).
Figure 6.29: Rod at rest in S′. The observers in S′ measure a length of 1 m for the rod. The blue line is the
worldline of the right end of the rod. The observers in S measure a shorter length.

The worldlines of the two ends intersect the x axis at 0 and 0.8 m. These two intersection points represent the
positions of the moving rod’s ends at the same time in frame S. Their difference therefore gives the length of
the rod as measured by S. The length is 0.8 m, less than 1 m. The rod which moves according to observers in S
has contracted in length.

What if we had a rod of proper length 1 m at rest in the S frame which was viewed by observers in the S′
frame, Figure 6.30?




Figure 6.30: Rod at rest in S. The observers in S measure a length of 1 m for the rod. The blue lines are the
worldlines of the ends of the rod. The observers in S′measure a shorter length.


  EXAM TIP

  If the rod is moving its length must be measured when the position of its ends are recorded at the same
  time.

  It is only lengths in the direction of the velocity that are contracted.


The two blue lines represent the worldlines of the ends of the rod. The worldlines of the two ends intersect the
x′ axis at 0 and 0.8 m. These two intersection points represent the positions of the rod’s ends at the same time
in frame S′. Their difference therefore gives the length of the rod as measured by S′. The length is 0.8 m, less
than 1 m.

  EXAM TIP

  Do not be led astray by your knowledge of Euclidean geometry! The length in S′ ‘looks’ longer. But it isn’t.
  The scale on the two axes is not the same!


Time dilation and spacetime diagrams
Spacetime diagrams also show the phenomenon of time dilation very clearly. Figure 6.31 shows a spacetime
diagram showing the standard frames S and S′. A clock at rest in the origin of S′ ticks at O and then again at P.
The duration of the tick is ct′ = 1. What is the duration of the tick according to frame S? We have to draw a line
parallel to the x axis through P. This intersects the S time axis at point Q. This interval is greater than 1.
Figure 6.31: The green line is the worldline of a clock at rest in frame S′. This clock shows ct′ = 1 at P.

Similarly, Figure 6.32 can be used to analyze a clock at rest at the origin of frame S. It ticks at O and then at P.
The duration of the tick is such that ct = 1. From P we draw a line parallel to the axis x′. The line intersects the
ct′ axis at Q. The interval OQ is longer than 1.




Figure 6.32: This clock shows ct = 1 at P.


  EXAM TIP

  Do not be led astray by your knowledge of Euclidean geometry! In triangle OPQ the hypotenuse is the
  side OP, and so it should have been the longest side of the triangle. But the geometry of spacetime
  diagrams is not Euclidean! The Pythagorean theorem does not hold.


Simultaneity and spacetime diagrams
Simultaneity is easy to see on spacetime diagrams. In Figure 6.33 events A and B are clearly simultaneous in
frame S (ct =1.2 for both).
Figure 6.33: A and B are simultaneous in the S frame.

In frame S′, B occurs first. To find out how much earlier B occurs use a Lorentz transformation:

Δx = 1.0 − 0.5 = 0.5 m and Δt = 0. So
      ′            ′         ′
cΔt       = c (t       − t       )
                   B         A


                                 vΔx
          = γ (cΔt −                     )
                                     c

          = 1.25 × (0 − 0.60 × 0.5)

          = −0.38 m


The negative sign indicates B occurs earlier as we see from the diagram.

  CHECK YOURSELF 6

  A rocket moves past the ground. Two trees are hit by lightning the instant the rocket is halfway between
  the trees. The strikes happen at the same time as far the rocket is concerned. (See Figure 6.34.)




  Figure 6.34: For check yourself question 6.

  Use a spacetime diagram to determine which tree is hit fi rst according to the ground.

  Does light from the two strikes reach the rocket at the same time?


  WORKED EXAMPLE 6.14
The spacetime diagram in Figure 6.35 shows a number of events. List the events from earliest to latest in
each frame.




Figure 6.35: For worked example 6.14.

Answer
In S (blue frame) events A and C are simultaneous and occur after event B. (A and C are on the same line
parallel to the x axis).

In S′ (red frame) events B and C are simultaneous and occur before event A. (B and C are on the same
line parallel to the x′ axis).


WORKED EXAMPLE 6.15

A spacecraft is moving away from earth at speed 0.60c. At ct = 0, just as the spacecraft begins to move,
a flash of light leaves a space station which is at rest 4.0 ly from earth, according to earth. Using a
spacetime diagram, estimate the time the flash of light arrives at the spacecraft according to a earth
and b the spacecraft.

Answer
We must draw the worldline of a photon leaving the position x = 4.0 ly and see where it intersects the
worldline of the spacecraft. This is a time of ct = 2.5 ly for earth. To estimate the time for the spacecraft
we must find the scale on the worldline of the spacecraft (red line). The gamma factor is 1.25. This
allows us to find the ‘1’ on the worldline of the spacecraft. The photon worldline is at 45° as shown. By
measuring on the worldline we find a time of ct′ = 2.0 ly. This is all shown on the spacetime diagram in
Figure 6.36.
Figure 6.36: For worked example 6.15.




CHECK YOURSELF 7

Verify the conclusion of worked example 6.15 using Lorentz transformations.


WORKED EXAMPLE 6.16

Two stars, A at position –3 ly and B at position +3 ly, both explode at ct = 0. A spacecraft moving at
velocity +0.60c is at x = 0 when ct = 0. Use a spacetime diagram to determine a which star exploded
first according to the spacecraft observers and b from which star explosion light reaches the spacecraft
observers first.

Answer
The red lines are the axes of the spacecraft frame, Figure 6.37. By drawing lines through the events
representing the explosions parallel to the space axis of the spacecraft and see where they intersect the
time axis we see that B occurred first. Photon lines at 45° from A and B show that light from B arrives
first.
Figure 6.37: For worked example 6.16.



SCIENCE IN CONTEXT

The power of diagrams
Spacetime diagrams offer a simple and pictorial way of understanding relativity. They can be used to
unambiguously resolve misunderstandings and ‘paradoxes’. Their power lies in their simplicity and their
clarity. In physics, the use of diagrams, as well as appropriate notation, in describing situations has always
helped understanding. Spacetime diagrams are especially useful in seeing what event can or cannot cause
another. Feynman diagrams are another example of this, as is the use of vectors as opposed to
components.


TEST YOUR UNDERSTANDING

In the questions that follow, the spacetime diagrams represent two inertial frames. The black axes
represent frame S. The red axes represent a frame S′ that moves past frame S with velocity v.
34 Use the spacetime diagram (Figure 6.38) to calculate the velocity of frame S′ relative to S.




    Figure 6.38: For question 34.

35 a     On the spacetime diagram in Figure 6.39 draw the worldline of a particle that is:
         i    at rest in frame S at x = 1.0 m.

         ii   moving with velocity –0.40 c as measured in S and is at x = 1.0 m at t = 0.
        Figure 6.39: For question 35.

    b   A photon is emitted from position x = 1.5 m at t = 0. Use Figure 6.39 to estimate when the
        photon arrives at the eye of an observer at rest at the origin of frame S′ according to:
        i    S

        ii   S′

36 a    S′represents an alien attack cruise ship. Use the diagram in Figure 6.40 to determine the speed of
        the cruise ship relative to S.
    b   At t = 0, a laser beam moving at the speed of light is launched from x = 2 ly towards the cruise
        ship. By drawing the worldline of the laser beam, estimate the time when the beam hits the cruise
        ship according to:
        i    S

        ii   S′.




        Figure 6.40: For question 36.

37 The diagram in Figure 6.41 shows two lamps at x = ±0.5 m that turn on at time zero in frame S.
    Figure 6.41: For question 37.

    a    Determine which lamp turns on first in frame S′.

    b    Draw the worldlines of the photons emitted from the two lamps towards an observer at rest at
         the origin of S′.

   c     State the lamp whose light reaches an observer at the origin of frame S′ first.
38 a     Look at Figure 6.42. The dashed blue line is parallel to the primed time axis and intersects the
         primed x axis at P. The S′ frame moves with speed v relative to S. Find v and, by using Lorentz
         transformations, find the co-ordinates of P in the S′ frame. Hence label the event with co-
         ordinates x′ = 1, ct′ = 0.




         Figure 6.42: For question 38.

    b    Repeat part a where now the speed v is arbitrary to find the space co-ordinate of P. Express your
         answer in terms of the gamma factor.

39 By any suitable method, locate the events (x′ = 1 m, ct′ = 0) and (x′ = 0, ct′ = 1 m) on the spacetime
   diagram in Figure 6.43.
    Figure 6.43: For question 39.

40 The purple line in the diagram in Figure 6.44 represents a rod of length 1.0 m at t = 0 as measured in
   the S frame.




    Figure 6.44: For question 40.



    a    By drawing appropriate lines, show that the length of the rod measured in frame S′ is less than 1
         m.

    b    i    Draw a line to represent a rod of length 1.0 m as measured in the S′ frame.
         ii   By drawing appropriate lines, show that the length of the rod measured in frame S is less
              than 1 m.

41 A clock is at rest at the origin of frame S′ as shown in Figure 6.45. Its first tick occurs at ct′ = 0. The
   second tick of the clock occurs at ct′ = 1 m as measured in S′.
      Figure 6.45: For question 41.

      a    Mark these events on the spacetime diagram.

      b    By drawing appropriate lines estimate the time in between ticks as measured in S.

 42 A rocket leaves earth at speed 0.80 c on its way to a planet a distance 20 ly as measured by earth.
    When the rocket gets to the planet it sends a light signal to earth.
      a    When does the signal get to earth according to (i) earth and (ii) rocket?

      b    Illustrate your answers with a spacetime diagram.

      c    At t = 0, another rocket leaves the planet returning to earth with speed 0.80 c relative to earth. As
           the rocket sets out it sends a light signal to earth. When does the light signal arrive at earth
           according to (i) earth and (ii) rocket clocks?

      d    Illustrate your answers on a spacetime diagram.



Links
The formulas of special relativity make no sense when the speed of a material object reaches or exceeds the
speed of light. This implies that the speed of light is a limiting speed. But the laws of Newtonian mechanics say
that as long as we provide energy to a body, its speed will increase indefinitely. This implies that the laws of
Newtonian mechanics also need to be modified! This has serious consequences implying that mass and
energy are equivalent and can be converted into each other—see Unit E.
SELF-ASSESSMENT CHECKLIST

                                                                               Nearly     Ready to
 I am able to …                                              Section Not yet
                                                                               there      move on

 understand the term reference frame                         6.1

 work with the Galilean transformation equations             6.1

 recite the postulates of the special theory of relativity   6.1

 appreciate the constancy of the speed of light              6.1

 apply the Lorentz transformation equations                  6.1

 understand the effects of time dilation and length          6.2
 contraction

 apply the relativistic velocity addition formula            6.2

 describe how muon decay experiments provide                 6.2
 evidence for relativity

 understand the spacetime interval                           6.3

 work with spacetime diagrams                                6.3

 describe various events through spacetime diagrams          6.3



REFLECTION

Do you understand what an inertial reference frame is and can you identify one? Do you understand the
postulates of relativity? Can you apply the Lorentz transformation formulas? Do you understand the
concepts of time dilation and length contraction? Do you understand how muon decay experiments provide
evidence for relativity? Can you find the speed of an object from its worldline on a spacetime diagram? Can
you explain time dilation using a spacetime diagram? Can you explain length contraction using a
spacetime diagram?


EXAM-STYLE QUESTIONS

You can find questions in the style of IB exams in the digital coursebook.
CHECK YOURSELF ANSWERS

1   B and C because there is no acceleration.

2   9 m s−1 due south.

3   No, we have to subtract the time it took light to get to the observer.
                                                                                                          Δx
4   If A and B are separated by a distance Δx, the time it would take the photon to get to B would be           .
                                                                                                           c
                                                                                      2
                                                                             (Δx)
    The spacetime interval is then c (Δt) − (Δx)
                                              2    2           2
                                                                   = c
                                                                         2                     2
                                                                                          − (Δx)     .
                                                                                                   = 0
                                                                                  2
                                                                              c


5   a         Yes
    b         Yes

    c         No

6   The spacetime diagram in Figure 6.47 shows that the left tree was hit first. Photon lines from the
    strikes arrive at the rocket at the same time.

7   In frame S the light will reach the spacecraft in a time t given by 0.6ct + ct = 4 ⇒ ct = 2.5 ly when the
                                        2.5
    spacecraft is at x = 0.6c ×               = 1.5 ly   . The gamma factor is 1.25 and so
                                         c
                               0.6c
    ct
         ′
             = 1.25 × (2.5 −          × 1.5) = 2.0 ly  .
                                c




Figure 6.47: For check yourself question 6.
